---
date: 2025-07-28T14:02
tags:
  - Chemistry
  - Ch4
cssclasses:
  - default
---
electrons are transferred from one reactant to another. Such reactions are called either **oxidation-reduction reactions** or **redox reactions**

# Oxidation and Reduction
One of the most common examples of a redox reaction is the corrosion of metal. This is also known as rusting
When an atom or ion loses electrons in a chemical reaction it is called **oxidation**, similarly when an atom or ion gains electrons in a chemical reaction it is called **reduction**
One example of oxidation is$$2Ca(s)+O_2(g)\ce{->}2CaO(s)$$
All of these type of reactions feature an equal amount of oxidation and reduction. This is necessary to balance the charges

# Oxidation Numbers
Before we can identify these types of reactions we need to understand the initial amount of electrons in a certain element this is called the elements **oxidation number** or **oxidation state**
If the ion is monatomic use the charge already present otherwise follow these rules
1. For an atom in its *elemental form*, the oxidation number is always zero. Thus, each $H$ atom in the $H_2$ molecule has an oxidation number of 0 and each $P$ atom in the $P_4$ molecule has an oxidation number of 0
2. For any *monatomic ion* the oxidation number equals the ionic charge. Thus, $K^+$ has an oxidation number of $+1$, $S^{2-}$ has an oxidation number of $-2$, and so forth. In ionic compounds the alkali metal ions (group 1A) always have a $1+$ charge and therefore an oxidation number of $+1$. The alkaline earth metals (group 2A) are always $+2$, and aluminum (group 3A) is always $+3$ in ionic compounds. (In writing oxidation numbers we will write the sign before the number to distinguish them from the actual electronic charges, which we write with the number first.)
3. *Nonmetals* usually have negative oxidation numbers, although they can sometimes be positive:
	1. The oxidation number of *oxygen* is usually $-2$ in both ionic and molecular compounds. The major exception is in compounds called peroxides, which contain the ion $O_2^{2-}$ , giving each oxygen an oxidation number of $-1$.
	2. The oxidation number of *hydrogen* is usually $+1$ when bonded to nonmetals and $-1$ when bonded to metals.
	3. The oxidation number of *fluorine* is $-1$ in all compounds. The other halogens have an oxidation number of $-1$ in most binary compounds. When combined with oxygen, as in oxyanions, however, they have positive oxidation states.
4. The sum of the oxidation numbers of all atoms in a neutral compound is zero. The sum of the oxidation numbers in a polyatomic ion equals the charge of the ion.

# Oxidation of Metal by Acids and Salts
The reaction between a metal and either an acid or a metal salt conforms to the general
pattern$$\col$$