---
date: 2025-10-12T21:08
tags:
  - Chemistry
  - Ch6
cssclasses:
  - default
---
# Line Spectra
Radiation composed of a single wavelength is **monochromatic** similarly there are radiation's which have multiple wavelengths which are called **polychromatic**
When a polychromatic radiation is split into its monochromatic parts we obtain that certain radiation's **spectrum**
The fullest possible spectrum which has all the colors in visible light with equal intensity as well as no gaps is called the **continuous spectrum**
A good example for the continuous spectrum is a rainbow
However not all radiation sources form this type of spectrum
Gasses when in a cathode tube (I think) form their own characteristic spectrum's. They follow a simple general formula called **Rydberg's equation**
$$\frac{1}{\lambda}=(R_H)\left(\frac{1}{n^2_1}-\frac{1}{n^2_2}\right)$$
Where $R_H$ is Rydberg's constant which is equal to $1.096776\cdot10^7m^{-1}\text{~or~}\frac{1.096776}{m}$ and where $n$ are the energy states of the electron shells. Not $n_2$ should always be larger than $n_1$

# Bohr's Model
Basically Bohr explained atom's by saying the laws of physics and chemistry known at the time didn't apply because at this scale energy being quantized would actually matter and electrons could only jump energy states and not move in non integer energy states.

His 3 assumptions or postulates :skull:
1. Only orbits of certain radii, corresponding to certain specific energies, are permitted for the electron in a hydrogen atom.
2. An electron in a permitted orbit is in an “allowed” energy state. An electron in an allowed energy state does not radiate energy and, therefore, does not spiral into the nucleus.
3. Energy is emitted or absorbed by the electron only as the electron changes from one allowed energy state to another. This energy is emitted or absorbed as a photon that has energy $E=h\nu$.

# The Energy States of the Hydrogen Atom
We use the hydrogen atom here because it is the most simple to understand and calculate however this principle works for all the other elements as well
Using both Rydberg's equation and Bohr's model we can say the following
$$E=(-hcR_H)\left(\frac{1}{n^2}\right)=-2.18\cdot10^{-18}J\left(\frac{1}{n^2}\right)$$
The constant will always stay the same. If you notice as $n$ approaches infinite (Limits) this entire function goes towards 0. This equation tells us that the more negative the value is the more stable an element is. This aligns with the fact that the lowest energy state is the most stable
When an element is in its lowest energy state it is said to be in its **ground state**
When an element is in a higher energy state it is said to be in an **excited state**

Additionally we can calculate the energy it would take to jump from 1 state to another by cleverly rearranging the formula to
$$\Delta E=h\nu=\frac{hc}{\lambda}=(-2.18\cdot10^{-18}J)\left(\frac{1}{n^2_f}-\frac{1}{n^2_i}\right)$$
With some rearranging we realize this is actually the same thing as Rydberg's equation. So when solving questions use the other one its easier

# Limitations of the Bohr Model
As it turns out, the Bohr model was only an important step along the way toward the development of a more comprehensive model
It worked but only for hydrogen atoms. Also it was wrong in some areas